---
layout: post
title: "Bad Case of Data Glut? Use Your Eyes"
date: {}
author: John Dawes
avatar: john
categories: article
published: true
---

Data visualization has a broad array of definitions and categories but at the Commons we sum it up as using elegant graphical design to transform complex data sets into actionable information. With web access becoming more and more pervasive, environmental organizations can tap a limitless amount of resources that can be leveraged to build visuals that fast track positive environmental change. One thing that we hear from many organizations working in the field is that "there are a lot of tools out there" or "Really? Another data repository?," and I'd say for the most part we agree. There are no shortages of data providers, portals, or databases but there is most certainly a shortage of clean informative data visualization and design.

<!-- ex -->

## Biological Bandwidth

One of the Common's growing list of heros is <a href="http://www.davidmccandless.com/" target="_blank">David McCandless</a>. His genius lies not only in creating viral graphics for <a href="http://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2011/jun/24/information-beautiful-fish-eat#" target="_blank">The Guardian</a> but we subscribe to his bigger theory that 

> "by visualizing information, we turn it into a landscape that you can explore with your eyes".

Biologically he is dead on, we are wired for data visualization. There is a huge amount of data coming into your brain through your eyes; the optic nerve is nothing more than a giant pipe pouring data into your brain. (<a href="http://columbiadatascience.com/2013/10/13/mapping-data-to-senses/" target="_blank">one study</a> estimates the transmission speed of the optic nerve at around 9Mb/sec). Once that data arrives at the brain, it is rapidly processed by sophisticated software that is extremely good at tasks such as edge detection, shape recognition, and pattern matching. These minor conscious and subconscious functions in your brain lay the framework for interpreting or detecting patterns in data and simultaneously the bigger picture.

<iframe src="http://embed.ted.com/talks/david_mccandless_the_beauty_of_data_visualization.html" width="822" height="315" frameborder="0" scrolling="no" webkitAllowFullScreen mozallowfullscreen allowFullScreen></iframe>

## Consolidation and Actionable Insight

Using deceivingly simple tactics in information design, we can unlock subtle variations in huge amounts of environmental data that would be otherwise hidden. For example going to <a href="http://waterdata.usgs.gov/md/nwis/uv?01646500" target="_blank">this link</a> allows one to pull current and past flows of the Potomac River in a tabular format. Data pulls can bring back more than 6,000 records and most of the time it consists of attributes such as Date, Time, and Flow (Cubic Feet/Second). Having access to these resources is only a single step toward drawing useful information from the records. Picking out flooding events would be like finding a needle in a haystack, the solution is consolidation and intelligent information design:

<iframe src="http://apps.chesapeake-commons.org/flowrate/potomac.html" height="362" width="822" frameborder="0" marginwidth="0" marginheight="0" scrolling="no"></iframe>

This very simple visualization above takes nearly 400 flow readings, places them over a matrix of date and time, and assigns a <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Choropleth_map" target="_blank">choropleth </a>to the river's flow. The result is that a subject's eyes go directly to the anomalies or hot colors. The two hottest colors are attributed to the flash flooding caused by Superstorm Sandy. Upon deeper study a user can see other months where there is a darker red that slowly trails to a lighter more "normal" yellow. This indicates a steady rainfall which brought the river flow up and then back down, conversely Superstorm Sandy caused rivers to flash flood. The visual allows one to process the data so quickly that it can almost be taken for granted that nearly 400 independent readings are distilled down to a useful story about previous river conditions.